We're talking to Michael Keller at Stanford, and you just said something to me about I should talk to who else.
With regard to the National Library in Sarajevo, you should speak with Tanya Lorkovic, who's the Slavic Studies Curator at Yale University Library.
At Yale?
Yes.
Oh, great.
She's responsible for the librarians who are going to be helping to rebuild that library.
She's a curler herself, and brilliant, wonderful,
well-known, well-traveled, sensitive person.
Absolutely the right person.
You wouldn't know off the top of your head how to spell her name.
O-R-K-O-V-I-C.
And it's... Do you know what department she's in?
Yeah, she's in the library, in the Sterling Library in the Slavic Studies.
She's down last week with Harold Bloom.
I'm entering the canon debate as well.
The other person you should speak to is...
Professor Ival Banat, B-A-N-A-C, who is the professor of history at the Central European University in Budapest, and a professor of history at Yale University.
Banat is also a co-op, but very much involved with library matters and quite, quite smart.
And I'm lucky in a way, I wish there had been more press on it to help it, but there's been very little press on this.
There's been something in the New York Times in the last couple of months.
Just on the fourth anniversary, scant.
Not a whole lot.
An inside story, really.
An inside story.
So, I mean, you've certainly... I was having Bill Lees as a friend.
He's great.
I was hoping he'd be here for the Inner Korean Book Fair.
He was here last time, but he didn't come.
I didn't see him.
Where was he?
Saturday morning while I gave a talk.
He was staff friends at the Stanford Library, and he was there.
And I told them when I was coming down to the city, you know, this is great, Yale, you know, tell them that.
And they said very nice things.
Well, you certainly have been talked about, you know, you are certainly, when people talk about philosophies of libraries, of the future, the plug-in library, all this, there's even a quote that's been attributed to you, rightly or wrongly, if you can't plug it in, I'm not interested.
That's absolutely untrue.
Not an accurate quote.
I don't think I've ever said that.
So is there a quote that even comes close to that?
Why don't I try to give you a sound bite?
Let me talk about what I'm up to.
And that will allow us to enter the conversation.
We're in a kind of ironic situation in the great research libraries of the country.
On the one hand, there are more and more books to attract our interest.
And the fact that there are more books results from the fact of information technology supporting publishing.
So now suddenly people with fairly low investment in technology can bring out what looks like a credible book.
Whether the content is credible or not is something else.
But suddenly publishing is no longer an arcane and difficult thing for people.
So a lot of niche publishers and a lot of governments are putting out a lot more than they ever put out before.
We have more and more books to select from, more and more materials for scholarship to navigate amongst in print, while simultaneously we have the opportunity and, in my view, the responsibility to deliver to our faculty and student clientele, our readers,
the materials that they most use and most want on the net seven days a week, 24 hours a day.
So it's an ironic situation because in both cases, information technology and the Internet have had an enormous impact on the production of new books, print on paper, new journals, new documents, new statements, new great literature, all that stuff.
and simultaneously has produced a lot of other sorts of material which is really partly a kind of parody or mimic of the print world and partly a whole new information domain altogether.
And from my perspective, a professional in research librarianship, which has been in my trade for a very long time now, is to provide to the readers, to the scholars and students at our place and our places,
the information in any genre, any format, any medium that is relevant to their work.
There's several different axes of consideration.
One is a chronological axis, one is a genre axis, one is a format axis, one is a rarity to commonality axis.
As far as I'm concerned, source material for scholars, students, runs the gamut from pre-ancient
ancient cuneiform tablets and papyrus fragments and so forth, right forward to material that will never see ink on paper, but it will only exist in bits and bytes on a network somewhere.
That's the intellectual world.
Are you suggesting also that there's a co-equal, are you placing co-equal weight on all of these areas?
No.
Are you tilting towards the technology?
We place the emphasis on content.
The choices we make are based on the relevance of the content to the programs or the programs to be at Stanford.
For that matter, for the whole research community.
Our principal emphasis is on what is important for Stanford students and faculty and what is an opportunity for them.
In truth, we are interpreting what we hear from them and know of them.
It is also true that this context, the Stanford context, is a whole lot more wired up and technologically engaged than lots of other research university contexts, partly because of Stanford's enormous engagement, investment, and relationship to Silicon Valley.
So what happened here after the Second World War and the building of a great university
great in engineering, which has fed lots and lots of technologists down into Silicon Valley and like places, but also a great medical school and a fantastic law school and arguably one of the best business schools in the country and a superb humanities and sciences school and greater sciences and environment, environmental studies school.
Each one of these have had an influence on the way we think about what we do as the principal
you know, academic support unit of the university.
So we spend a lot of time thinking about content.
We spend a lot of time thinking about how convenient it is, it might be to provide one resource or another on the net.
We spend a lot of time balancing costs and investments.
We also, I think, have to, I've lost my chance of thought there,
Part of the problem with this whole business is that of acceptance.
And what we've discovered is that the scholars at the leading edge of a discipline, who tend to be the younger ones and the most influential ones, so it's an ironic contrast, the graduate students and the young assistant professors and the Nobel laureates and the Nobel laureate equivalents in all disciplines tend to gravitate to the
the new methodologies, the new source materials, the new methods that can be used to extract value and knowledge from source materials.
So they tend to be interested and have influenced the course of all disciplines.
I say that without qualification, there is virtually no discipline that has not been influenced by information technology.
So they tend to influence what's going on in disciplines.
Because we follow the disciplines, both as practiced here and as practiced globally, we cannot help but be invested in information technology.
Now, as it happens, for a very long time, in fact, for the moment I stepped into librarianship, there has been a continuous investment in the use of information technology to improve the service that librarians provide to their readers.
It started off with the work of Fred Kilgore at the Yale Medical Library a long time ago.
eventually migrating to the Ohio College Library Center to create OCLC.
Which is essential.
Well, what it turned out to be was the first of the bibliographic utilities, and it's the most extensive of bibliographic utilities.
And when I was a junior G-man librarian in my first year on an acting contract at Sunny Buffalo, I was, because of the time, still a graduate student, of course, I was immediately sucked up into
a decision-making group in the library as a representative of the very youngest generation to help make a decision about whether Southern Buffalo as well as four other universities in Upper New York State called the Foul Group, F-A-U-L, should in effect be the first group outside of Ohio to subscribe to the OCLC services.
And we did.
And as a result of that subscription, we got into the
into avoiding redundancy of cataloging and classification efforts and therefore cataloging more materials.
We got to building databases of bibliographic records, and ultimately we got the respective conversion.
I participated in that decision-making about 10 years after that initial engagement, maybe a little less, to put our car catalogs, and despite what Nicholson-Baker says, those car catalogs as transferred are very robust
reflections of what had been on the cards and more.
As a result of that investment, the investment of online cataloging and classification and the retrospective conversion of card catalogs, these kinds of libraries are getting a huge increase in circulation because people can find more, more accurately and more quickly, and they can find materials of more relevance and more materials of relevance than they could formally just by flipping through the cards.
Our circulation rates
in terms of actual movement of materials out of the shelves and out of the buildings are generally up between 30% and 60%, depending on where you are.
Certainly in this place they're up about 40%, 45%.
No question about what the influence is.
It's totally clear.
In effect, the universities have gotten that much larger a yield from the capital investment they've made in these libraries, in these collections, as well as the processing and interpretation of the collections.
It's a phenomenon.
It's absolutely fantastic.
You mentioned Baker.
What's your take on this as an outsider?
Well, I'm not really an outsider.
I think that this whole thing is part of Nicholson Baker's general scheme to keep his name and his essays in the public eye.
Of course, there's a new volume of the essays, which is just released quite coincidentally.
That essay, that original essay in The New Yorker, offended a lot of people in the profession.
It offended me a lot more because I knew he had information at hand, which he chose not to use because it did not fit his theory of what's going on in libraries.
Well, he says, for instance, that the UC Berkeley retrospective conversion project did not transfer all the information off the cards onto the database.
It's simply not so.
He did not report all the information that he had.
He did not report all the good things that have happened as a result of retrospective conversion.
That's why I would talk to him.
You should definitely talk to him.
These are things, if you think of questions you'd like me to raise to him.
No, I don't need you to ask any questions for me.
No, not for me, but I mean that you would like to see some of the... Then there's this gray irony of the San Francisco Public Library.
He is taking energy and time away from a bunch of people who have a lot of very distinct things to do.
as a result of building a fabulous building.
That building is absolutely a mind-boggling, groundbreaking building.
Why?
Not because it's a highly wired building, though it is, not because they've provided a fair amount of extra shelf space and are finally getting more of their collection accessible to the public, which they are,
but because the building itself is drawing masses of people in.
It's a very attractive building.
It's a community-building building.
Public tours twice a day.
Oh, it's unbelievable.
And for this guy and his whole cadre of people that are really madly in love with card catalogs to go in and disturb, really disturb, the work that a small staff has got to cope with, they had no idea they were going to get so much traffic as they've gotten.
Seems to me to be on a front.
The guy isn't even a citizen of San Francisco, and yet he's over there doing business, trying to make trouble for these good librarians.
Let him work on the Berkeley situation if he wants to.
He's a citizen of Berkeley.
I just find the whole approach annoying.
The truth is that the San Francisco Public Library, the new one, and its leadership, starting with Ken Dallin, have done something that is quite brilliant.
And it has to be experienced to be understood.
They've built this.
They built this building, which is an intersection of modern technology, very sensitively applied, wonderful collections, wonderful arrangements of collections in the building.
They've encouraged community groups to become enmeshed in the program library, all kinds of community groups, gay, lesbian, Asian American, Hispanic American, Afro American, children, the whole thing.
Their circulation rates are up.
Their visitation rates are up.
Ken is now turning his focus to expanding this engagement of the community and the library's programs to the branch libraries.
It's a fantastic story.
It's a very positive story.
You think it's translated to literacy concerns as well?
Absolutely.
I mean, visitation is visitation.
You know, for people like going to the zoo.
No, I'm quite convinced.
Their circulation rates are very much higher.
That would be the measurement.
That'd be one measurement.
I think you have to wait some number of years and see how well the schools engage with the libraries, not just the main branch, but all the libraries, and maybe talk with a bunch of people and do some kind of systematic survey.
My belief is that that building is such a positive atmosphere that it's going to have a major effect, not just in San Francisco, but all around the country.
I think it's a brilliant exposition of what's possible.
Have you seen the new Sybil in New York?
No, I haven't been there.
I've been to that.
I had a wonderful interview with Paul McClare.
I hear it's fantastic.
It's great.
Little places where you plug in.
That's going to be true.
But of course, they say that's why we set up that facility.
You can still go to 45th Street, the main library.
This is SIBL, Science, Industry, Business, and that's the function.
We haven't even talked about generally looking ahead.
The next millennium is hard upon us.
And I'm concerned, you know, with the printed books, special collections.
Let me just add, yesterday at the fair, I had an unplanned but quite rewarding interview with the new director of special collections at Berkeley.
Charles Folliver.
Yeah, I love him.
Very nice guy.
Good guy.
And he says, you know, I, and when he said it, I was taking notes because, you know, we take this.
This is pretty good.
He doesn't think that Berkeley, the Bancroft Library, should be collecting printed books.
He thinks that they should focus on unique things, manuscripts, and also digitizing them because they're precious and they're fragile.
And he went on and on, but that was the thrust of what he said.
What was your response to that?
Well, I'm going to comment about our special collections program.
I'm asking you to do.
I throw that out as a... I admire Charles Feilhaber enormously.
He's a very good scholar, and I believe he'll be just a brilliant director of the Bancroft.
Our perspective is very similar.
We have embarked upon a refreshment of our Special Collections program.
From my first days here, we've bought more collections of unique materials, starting with Allen Ginsberg, but going also in all kinds of other directions.
We've bought considerable collections of rare books.
a few manuscripts.
We're in the act of negotiating the gift of a major collection of commercially available software, but from the beginning of the revolution to the present time, in coordination with a museum.
Will this be considered our special collection?
Absolutely.
That's pretty interesting.
Why not?
I mean, we have everything from cuneiform to stuff on diskettes.
provided by, I mean, Robert Creeley's archive here has got material, drafts that he put on, that he did on diskettes.
Why shouldn't we have this other information?
It's just information, right?
We're going up to Corbus tomorrow, by the way.
We're going to spend two days up here.
It's, I mean, if one is, if one allows one's vision of what a library is to be limited, then one is forestalling the future.
In effect, you would prevent the library from continuing to be relevant.
It would become a kind of museum.
I guess it begs the question.
How do you define a library?
What is a library?
Well, let me talk about what libraries do and maybe that would be my definition.
Go anywhere you want with it.
Okay.
My belief is that libraries are cultural organizations that have multiple responsibilities, but they can be, in any library, they can be reduced to five or six different ones.
One is libraries do selection.
select among a very, very large corpus or corpuses to build collections of relevance to particular populations.
And depending on the size of the library and the readership and so forth, you get these variations of what those collections are.
Two, libraries organize that information that they acquire.
And that information that they acquire may be physically owned and physically possessed, or it may not be.
It may be on the network.
It may be leased.
It may be something that's not owned at all, but is reliably available, but it's somehow been incorporated into the library's
sense of what its collection is.
Two is they organize that.
They catalog it and they classify it.
They provide finding aids for materials.
Increasingly, we're providing the kinds of access devices that allow readers using information technology to search for words and phrases, to search for dates, to search for geographical patterns and so forth, images.
That's the second item.
The third item is that we interpret the stuff.
We provide the reference service.
The same people who select the material
and their colleagues in the reference services answer questions.
They help people find the stuff.
And it doesn't matter whether it's print on paper, the strokes of a piece of quill on clay or whatever.
Thirdly, we circulate the stuff.
We distribute it.
We distribute it physically by circulation of books across the counter.
We distribute it on networks.
We distribute it in a variety of ways.
Sometimes we do it by radio works.
And lastly, we preserve the stuff, whether we're preserving it physically
because it has artifactual value, and in a lot of cases, places like Stanford and Berkeley and Yale and Harvard do a lot of work to preserve artifacts because they have, the artifacts themselves are scholarly value.
Well, I've been to the Harvard Supervisors.
Well, it's not just storing them.
I'm talking about washing them and cleaning them and re-silking them.
But then we also preserve the content by microfilming them and scanning them and putting them into various other
kinds of storage formats.
The sixth one is kind of an odd one, and it's odd because at this library, there's a kind of new responsibility.
My role here is to be university librarian.
I'm also director of Academic Information Resources, which is the largest single piece of academic computing in the university.
So I have tried very hard, and I've had a lot of help from a lot of good people,
to merge the attitudes of service and function that librarians have with the attitudes and techniques and qualities of professional information technology in service of the academic processes.
So we have this odd extra service and function here which is providing access to the tools and techniques of automation in service of teaching, learning, and research at Stanford.
There are probably several different sub-disciplines there, but that's the overview of what we're really up to in this kind of a place.
And I think at one level or another, that's true in almost all the research libraries in the country, whether they're public or private, whether they're associated with a university or not, whether they're a city library or a private library or whatever.
At some level, that's going on in practically every place.
I mentioned the Harvard Depository, the philosophy of Harvard, and I guess at Berkeley, UCLA, and many other places, many other places, other places.
There's no such thing as a dead book.
We all deaccession anything.
Do you have a policy on deaccession?
Do you do deaccession?
We don't deaccession very much.
When we have multiple copies for reserve purposes and N plus one copies, N minus one copies are not circulated anymore.
Our selectors may choose to read the book, but we don't throw things away.
Do you have a depository or repository?
We have an auxiliary library that we had to build because of the
damage to this building right here.
When we finish rebuilding this building, we'll move much of that collection back in here, and that will be our depository library.
But it's right on campus, and I believe very much in keeping Stanford's books on campus.
That actually has a reading room out there, and we page books from it for readers two, three, four times a day.
It's very accessible.
Unlike the Harvard Depository, which has, because of the 13.5 million
Yeah, and they also have no room in Cambridge to put one up.
And they have 100 libraries all over the place.
What's your philosophy on, I mean, you touched on it, but maybe you can articulate it on special collections, on acquiring special collections?
My philosophy on special collections derives from my own work as a musicologist, where I use source materials in a lot of libraries in Italy and elsewhere.
I believe that unique source materials bring a special quality to the educational experience.
This notion was reinforced by my time at Yale, where the undergraduates at Yale were the largest single body of readers in both the Beinecke Library and the Department of Manuscripts and Archives, two of the largest but certainly not the only special collections at Yale.
I believe very firmly that undergraduates and graduate students ought to have an experience with a source of unique value.
So as I think about what makes Stanford's libraries distinctive and what makes the Stanford educational experience distinctive, I want there to be two things that are present there.
One is I want every undergraduate
and every graduate student for whom it's relevant to have an experience in our Special Collections department or among our Special Collections.
And we, too, have some Special Collections in other places.
I want them to have, I want their faculty to know that the undergraduates are welcome and that we have materials that they can use and rightly should use.
Could you give an example of how an undergraduate could benefit from something like that?
Sure.
Let us take the Black Panther Party papers, the Huey Newton papers.
There are undergraduate students in Afro-American studies working on the politics and social vectors in the mid to late 60s into the mid to late 70s.
The Black Panther Party papers are brilliant source materials for kids interested in how African Americans try to take back some political power for themselves.
And this particular set of papers illustrate a particular
political parties attempt to do that.
It's a fabulous way for these kids to understand the past, the recent past.
It brings vitality to the thing.
Music students should use Lully's scores to do a new edition of Lully.
Why not?
It's accessible and under the right conditions.
L-U-L-L-Y.
Jean-Baptiste Lully, 17th century.
You guys won't have to flail over.
So there's that one vector, and that's very much special collections, and that informs what we do in special collections here.
So we try also to provide faculty with the grist for their research, and it's faculty in the humanities and sciences in particular that we try to serve, but we're also doing things in engineering with a history of science and technology.
We're building collections.
Collections that were started here a long time ago, we're now building onto them.
Are there any areas where you would like to claim distinction for the university?
Well, we absolutely have distinction in the history of science and technology.
I mean, also to characterize your tenure, too, where you have gone.
I've continued that vector, and as things go along, there'll be some things to be proud of.
I can't announce the one that we're...
We're two years away from publication on this.
I suspect that by the end of the year I will have persuaded the Cabrinity family to give their materials to Stanford.
Their son, who died prematurely, very young, had been a Stanford undergraduate for a couple of years.
What's the name of the family again?
Cabrinity.
The father was a vice president with IBM and something of an entrepreneur.
I don't know what the source of the income was, but the Sun essentially spent 10 years or 15 years of life building up this collection of 35,000 or 40,000 pieces of software.
But with all the documentation, the packaging, and a whole herd of what has become gray literature of popular computing magazines of one kind or another that rose and fell.
Some of them continued, some of them didn't.
all kinds of books and so forth.
They form a pretty thorough survey of what was going on in the commercial world where mass marketing of software... I would even come out to see this.
We're doing it in conjunction with the Computer History Museum.
The Computer History Museum?
I think there'll be something open in a matter of a year and I'm hoping that I can persuade the university to put the museum itself in two years.
We're publishing late 1999.
You should talk to Glenn Bell.
Glenn and Gordon Bell are the lead people in the Computer History Museum.
Fabulous people.
They're really
This is interesting for me.
Well, you see, what we've done is this history, science, and technology archive, and they have the capacity to take care of the software.
So we're going to leave, by the way, let me interrupt, that something should be doing this, by the way.
We're doing it.
But we're not the only ones doing it.
I mean, MIT is doing it.
Makes sense.
I think we're very strong in American literature, and especially American literature of
of the post-war period, especially poetry.
I also interrupted you of finishing the Cabrini thing.
Cabrinity.
That collection, I hope... Can I spell that by the way?
C-A-B-R-I-N-T-Y.
Cabrinity.
I probably left that an I on there somewhere.
Okay, well, you know.
Very interesting.
It's not a done deal, but I think it's close to being one.
It's a fabulous collection.
Of course, you're trying to work it as a gift, too.
It will be a gift.
Whoever gets it, it'll be a gift.
But I think we're the...
the major one that they're considering because of the relationship to the Computer History Museum.
And the Computer History Museum and the Stanford Libraries are going to interdigitate, in effect, so that we collect the archives... Did you invent that word?
No, that's a real word.
Freaks off.
Interdigitate?
Look it up.
We're going to work together.
Well, it has real meaning, because it's an articulation that has overlap and movement.
I do invent words occasionally, but only occasionally.
That may be one for all I know.
There's only one person picked me up.
Or the Samulsorium.
I have no idea.
I'll tell you what.
It takes over as a cute story.
Ask me to tell you two cute stories about the Blinker card catalog story, too.
I've got personal experience with that.
Go ahead.
Okay.
So there's the one, the science and technology.
We continue to do a lot of collecting down the valley.
We do oral histories.
Now we're doing video stuff.
We've got a project underway based on software we've written to store images of all kinds of source materials for students and faculty to use in that research project.
We do a lot in American literature, especially American literature after the Second World War, and especially the more avant-garde of that literature.
So Ginsburg fits into our Beat Poets collection, of which we had
Robert Creeley and Denise Levertov and a bunch of others, both local and national.
We have other American literature collections.
Steinbeck is very big here.
We have a fine Himalayan collection.
Now we have the Soranian collection and many, many others.
A little bit of controversy with some of these two letters, right?
Well, Ginsburg was a controversial one because a lot of people on the conservative side of
of culture in America and many in California felt that we were rewarding an anti-establishment guy by buying his stuff.
But it turns out that Allen Ginsberg had some sense of himself as a historical figure from the time he was quite young.
So he saved practically everything that had some intellectual value.
And Soran has the same characteristic.
And we have, as a result,
a way of looking not just at the literary process and the creative process, but at the life of a creative artist from very early in their lives right through to the end.
It's fabulous.
It's an amazing thing.
Was there some problem with Columbia untitled for this stuff?
Columbia?
With Ginsburg?
Yeah.
No.
Ginsburg had given or sold material to Columbia, and there was some material on deposit there, but when it came down to it, Ginsburg decided that he'd rather place this stuff with us, so he did.
And also the Sarayan material had a problem.
The Sarayan was an interesting thing.
Let me tell you a story as a precursor to that.
And address it for the record if you'd like.
I am going to address it for the record.
About a year and a half ago, Wallace Stegner, who was a fabulous writer, American writer, based in the latter part of his life here at Stanford, the man who formed the creative...
writing program here and was its first director and, you know, real sort of philosopher king, deposited at Stanford in the libraries his papers for a long time.
He gave us some things, but he also deposited most of it.
He was killed by an automobile accident, tragically, and way too young, near Santa Fe, and when his will was probated,
It turned out that he'd given all his material on deposit at the Stanford Libraries to the University of Utah, his undergraduate school.
Not because he was unhappy with the Stanford Libraries, but because he was unhappy with some of the things that Stanford had done after he had relinquished control of the creative writing program.
At least that's what I've heard.
His widow came to us and essentially said, we need this stuff to go to the University of Utah.
They own it now.
The will has been probated.
Of course, I was new.
I had no idea what was going on.
So I quick got the deposit agreement.
We have a contract with everyone who put something on deposit with us.
And I quick got the probated will, and within a day, we could see that there was no place to go except to say to Mrs. Stegner, yes, ma'am, where would you like if they go?
It was done in a matter of a week or two, the whole thing, including the delivery of the materials.
Absolutely no resistance.
Soran cases in outline are very similar to this.
Soran, when he died,
effectively disinherited his children and his ex-wives and gave his literary property, his naklas, to the Sorain Foundation.
What did you call it?
That's a German word.
It means what remained of his life.
How do you spell it?
N-A-C-H-L-A-S-S.
To the Sorain Foundation.
And the Sorain Foundation had been established by him to take care of just this eventuality.
It placed...
as much of the Sororian literary archive as I could at the Bancroft Library, thanks to the relationship with Jim Hart, the... Legendary.
Legendary, and really a wonderful guy.
I knew him quite well.
I worked up there for five years, and he and I did a bunch of prizes together.
He was one of these San Francisco Blue Bloods with incredible collections.
He was responsible for the Oxford Companion to American Literature,
four or five editions.
Which I find essential.
Absolutely.
The Companion to California.
Brilliant, brilliant, but a grand seigneur.
Not someone who's too much in the details of running the Bancroft Library.
He was a collector.
Material, 120-some-odd boxes eventually landed up on Bancroft's door, and they deselected some of it and sent it back into storage with the Soron Foundation.
It had two or three different homes, the stuff that didn't get collected at Bancroft over in Fresno.
Eventually, the president of the foundation decided that he was getting older, his board was getting older.
There were some decisions that had to be made about the long-term care and promulgation of the Soraya material and legend.
What would he do about this?
He came to us and spoke to us, and as he was talking to us, he said he was considering us, establishing a separate library in the Presidio, placing the materials at Bankeroth, all of them,
Placing the materials, all of them at the State Library of California.
And there was mentioned the possibility of placing this stuff at the University of Texas, Austin.
So there's a competition underway.
Were we interested?
Of course we're interested.
Soroyan, great figure in American literature.
How can we not be interested?
I knew the stuff was on deposit at the bank, but I knew they didn't own it.
And I knew that it was up to the owners to decide where they wanted to place it.
He eventually made an offer to us, which I refused.
Who's he?
The president of the foundation, involving a lot of money from us to the foundation.
Robert Satrakian.
Okay.
Very interesting man, and a very decent man, I think.
Mr. Satrakian made this offer to us, you know, send us a lot of money, we'll send you the stuff.
And I said, no.
I said, no.
We're interested in American literature, in truth, but I can't afford to spend this money on someone that doesn't have an active...
advocate among the faculty here.
We have no one working on Soroyan at the moment.
But I said, so that's over.
In six weeks, he came back to me and he said, Mike, we really have to make a deal.
I want this stuff to be at Stanford.
I have a lot of things I want to accomplish for Soroyan and with Soroyan's materials.
I want to sit down and talk with you about what those are.
So I sat down and talked with him, and several things have happened.
We made an agreement that said Stanford would acquire the Soroyan collection, the archives,
in toto, the literary archive.
Stanford would store the household goods while the foundation decided what to do with them.
They will insure them.
Stanford would accept ownership of the intellectual property, so we now own the copyrights.
Stanford would, with the income from the copyrights, manage the property, but also establish a writing price, which we're in the act of doing.
Stanford would also promote literacy and promote reading and scholarship on Soroyan, which we were in the act of beginning to do.
And we would do all these things in concert with the foundation so that the Stanford libraries and the foundation would create some operating committees to give us advice about what would be most effective in these various areas.
So I didn't have to put any money out.
Soroyan Foundation got to join all of its material in one place.
Which mattered to them.
Which matters to them enormously.
And
Because the Soran Foundation is a chartered foundation in the state of California, they decided that they had to go with this proposition to the Attorney General, which they did, to get his approval for the thing, and to the Supreme Court, which had probated the will, which gave the material, the ownership of the material, including the property, the intellectual property, to the foundation.
So they went to the Superior Court of San Francisco and asked the court to approve the agreement, which the court did.
They then...
wrote a letter to the Bancroft, and I have to say that I did not see that letter before it went out, and in a very one-page kind of way said, look, we decided to place this stuff with Stanford, and they had no inkling this was coming.
This is not the way I would have done it, but that's the way it happened.
There proceeded to be a low-yield explosion.
Yes, you can.
And some very fine people who are not responsible for whatever the relationship was between the Foundation and Bancroft
who came there only in the last year or two, Peter Lyman, the University of LeBron, my counterpart, and Charles Foulhaver, the head of the Bancroft, got enmeshed in this thing.
And their lawyers got enmeshed in this thing, and our lawyers got enmeshed in this thing, and the foundation's lawyers got enmeshed in this thing.
But in the end, the attorney general of the state of California said, look, you've got no case here, Berkeley, UC, because this material is owned by the foundation, and they have every right to do with their property what they want to do with it as long as it doesn't fly in the face
of what Soroy himself would have done, as he said, in his will.
And placing it at Stanford is a logical alternative to what situation it persists now.
And you don't own the stuff.
You have no interest in it.
And by comparison, I could cite the case at Boston University with the Martin Luther King material, where the family wants to bring it down to Atlanta, but they say, guess what?
The paperwork says he gives it all to BU.
BU wins.
You know, game, set, match, it seems to me.
The reason I started the story with a Stegner thing was an example of what
we did and what we do when such a situation arises.
Now, it turns out that Jim Hart did not have a deposit agreement with the Foundation or with Sir Royan for this material that was on deposit.
There was no contract.
That stuff was just sitting there for all those years.
So, but it does raise the delicate question, of course, of now what does this do with the relationship with sister universities?
Well, of course, that was an item on the press, you know,
How could Stanford do this to Berkeley?
How could we affect the relationship?
Our relationship with Berkeley has been based for a very long time on lots and lots of relationships between curators and bibliographers and disciplines, between circulation librarians, between reference librarians, between various administrators and so forth.
rich relationship.
I know in Boston, Cambridge, where I'm located, you know, they get together, well, we're collecting this, we aren't going to... Well, there was no such set of agreements at any high level.
Or understandings, even.
Or understandings.
There's one on science and technology.
Stanford's going to collect the valley.
But beyond that, we can find no...
recollection and i've talked to the people that were here before me about these matters and there's no recollection of any of that so a lot of this was sort of hype for the sake of this the case my opinion in the meantime by the way this was not this gentleman didn't even raise this no no we finally sat down and talked about this thing you have to realize two things charles falhaber is new to being head of the bankrupt library formerly he was a professor of spanish and portuguese he's a
He's an expert, a real distinguished expert in medieval Spanish literature.
In fact, he's sending me to the Columbus Library in Seville.
He's great.
He's a real bibliographer in that area.
But he has no particular experience running a great, big, and important special collections unit.
His colleague, Peter Lyman, who's the university librarian over there, came from USC.
and he'd been at Berkeley maybe for two years, and I don't know how long he'd been a university librarian at USC, but his whole library experience is something, I think, under 10 years.
And he'd been only at USC and then at Berkeley, and he'd been at Berkeley only less than two years when this whole thing broke.
We had a couple people fairly new to their own situations and reasonably new to research librarianship, although Peter Lyman is very experienced and speaks eloquently and well for libraries, and you really should talk to him.
He's a great guy.
On the other hand, you have a bunch of people here that are sort of wizened and grizzled and palaced.
I've been in these wars.
I've been in situations where depositors... And they're turf wars, aren't they?
Well, not only turf wars, but you get these arguments from the depositors and their heirs and legatees who think you haven't done right by the agreement, and battles are fought constantly in these places, constantly.
You do the best you can with what you've got, and what you use are contracts, wills,
Explicit agreements, recollected agreements, and all that you have.
I mean, I think that the relationship between Berkeley and Stanford is just great.
We finally had one of these sessions where someone says something and there's a five-minute waiting period while the next person decides what they want to say back.
Went on for two hours.
Very uncomfortable meeting.
We got a lot of things out on the table that they had no idea of, and they got a lot of things on the table that I had no idea of.
I found out about why they're so sensitive about this.
From their position, this was an aggravation of their Armenian-American studies program.
Well, it's true that Soroyan is an Armenian-American.
There's not a whole lot about Soroyan, however, that in his writing is directed to Armenian matters, per se.
He's an Americanist.
He writes about American matters.
He's an Armenian-American who had an interesting experience in this country, and I think, therefore, is worth looking at as an Armenian-American.
But the thrust of our interest in him has to do with American literature.
And I think you also touched on whether you could even state it.
By the way, how much time?
I've got 15 minutes.
Okay.
In terms of the 60s, is this an area that you've kind of staked out for yourself too?
60s, 70s, absolutely.
But not just the 60s and 70s.
We won't just focus on those two areas.
With the Hoover Institution, we're interested in the 20th century experiences of war and peace.
and the various cultural vectors that arise.
So we just participated with... And we're not talking about Tolstoy's novel.
When you say that... No, we're talking about Pasternak.
We just acquired Pasternak papers with them as a joint acquisition.
We've got... Do you make money change stamps?
Absolutely.
And by the way, you do have money to make acquisitions.
Yes, we do.
Because it's suggested maybe you don't have money or you haven't... We have money.
Are you not willing to spend money?
No, we spend money...
where it's relevant to spend money, but we first always try to see if we don't have a way of making another kind of a deal.
And in many, many cases, we're quite persuasive in getting gifts.
But we have money.
We have income from various endowments that are intended to provide for our special collections.
And I'm building that income.
And how did Peshek make it here?
How did that work?
Oh, I think that story is best told by the people in the Hoover, but essentially there was a contact to the Peshek family.
They've been doing a lot in the Soviet Union and Russia, and the family wanted some money, and they also wanted to be sure that the material would be in a safe place.
And as you see this terrible transition to a kind of chaos in Russian society, you see the questions about where the library programs are going to persist.
The libraries aren't getting paid.
They don't have money to turn on the lights.
replace the glass in the windows.
What's going to happen?
Let alone take care of the stuff.
Well, yeah.
But, you know, so I think various of these people are quite concerned about perpetual care and persistence of their material.
So here we are in this great place with a lot of ambition and a lot of know-how, and fortunately a university that expects us to do this work.
And can we, in the few minutes that we have left, again, I'm anticipating
The 21st of the next millennium.
Let's focus on that.
Have you seen our High Wire Press material?
No.
Okay.
About, just about two years, two and a half years ago, two years ago, we started something called the High Wire Press, which is an Internet.
What word?
High Wire, capital H-I-G-H, capital W-I-R-E press.
It's a unit of the Stanford University Libraries.
It has a web page.
You can go to highwire.stanford.edu.
Its intention is to, it has multiple intentions, but one intention is to improve scholarly communications, particularly in the hot sciences.
Another intention is to provide an alternative as Internet publishing develops to the more or less monopolistic model of scientific publishing now, today, in the print world.
journal publishing.
We started with a full text, fully indexed version of the journal Biological Chemistry, which is one of the largest, the second largest journal in the world today, scientific journal today.
They publish 800 pages a week.
They publish something like five, seven thousand articles a year.
They distribute their work to 7,000 subscribers, about half of whom are institutions.
Their science was growing so fast, they had to go from 48 issues a year to 52 issues a year.
They could see it growing, and they were worried that they would reach the four-pound limit of their mailing rate, which would put them in another mailing rate altogether.
Frankly, they weren't reaching their readers away from North America rapidly enough.
They were disadvantaged in their distant readers, basically.
The most advanced of the editors thought that there was some new advantage to be gained by publishing on the Internet.
So we proceeded to publish this thing on the Internet with them.
We're co-publishers with them.
And we did a joint venture to get it started.
We shared in the risk.
Having gotten it started, now we've created a kind of model.
Well, six weeks after we got it started, the publishers of Science magazine, American Association for Advanced Science, came to us and said, we'd like to talk to you.
Show us what you've got.
We went down to Washington, showed them what we had, and what started to be a show-and-tell turned out to be a contract negotiation session.
Science.
Yeah.
So we now have a partial text version of science on the web.
That is, there are abstracts and summaries of most articles.
Some things are complete, but most things are not.
And that's been going on now for just about a year.
And we're about... This is...
nondisclosure stuff until the fact.
In about a month, science will be a full-text version, and it'll be a subscription-only situation in January.
The whole text of the articles and all the footnotes.
It's on paper now.
It's going to be on the Internet.
On the 1st of August, we brought up a full-text, on-the-Internet edition of the Journal of Neuroscience.
Today visiting us are the publishers from the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, the single highest impact journal in the sciences in the world today.
We will bring up an Internet edition of their work.
So this is where we're going?
This is where we're going in some areas.
How about the printed book?
Well, you know, you're making a huge leap here.
Let's talk about science.
Well, you can read this, though.
Science journal publishing is a peculiar publishing world where
The time to print in the hot sciences needs to be as small as possible, but the refereeing process is key.
So you've got to have the scientists review their own work, but you've got to do it in a quick way, and you've got to get the word out there in a quick way.
So there's this competition, in effect.
In addition, there are ways of making the communication process much more effective and vivid than print on paper can provide.
We believe that journal publishing in the sciences, all the sciences, is where it's going to be, and we're taking it there.
in competition with others, but also with others.
And as soon as you get on, do you have a good computer at home or have access to one?
I just got a Toshiba 720.
And what's your link to the Internet?
I have two.
I go to Merck online in the local area.
But it's 28.8 basically, right?
Yeah, it's 28.8, yeah.
Okay.
If you've got some time sometime, I would like you to see this on a fast link.
When do you have to be able to see?
This afternoon.
Maybe I could have someone show you
what we're doing on somebody's terminal around here.
No problem.
If you give this, whoever I can find, an hour to show you what's going on, you'll see what's happening.
We've got another 12 journals waiting to come up, and their contracts are negotiated and we're starting to work.
We've just started work with the Stanford University Press, with the Grant Flamel Foundation, to bring monograph publishing to the web.
We think as a new
marketplace to be found for scholarly monographs.
Realize that most university presses publish fewer than 1,000 copies of any scholarly text.
That means that things are out of print almost immediately.
And they cost a fortune.
What's a better way to do this?
Well, you realize also that 40% of the publishing costs, whether it's journal or monographs, go to two things, printing and distribution.
If you can take that 40% away, you ought to be able to lower the costs or improve the mode of communication or both.
And that's what we're trying to do.
And we're working on it.
We've got some very interesting partners that are quite committed to this.
Things like this.
Novels, though.
Absolutely.
Novels, I think.
On the other hand, big reference works.
Have you seen Encyclopedia Britannica online?
It makes it a usable document.
The OED, for instance.
OED.
I'll have someone show you that, too, because we've got a very interesting reader we've developed locally that allows you to see a fact only in the page.
Not just the Asky stuff, but the Fossum, the Bullface, and all the rest of it.
I think we have to be very intelligent about this, and that means we have to make distinctions.
I don't want to sit in bed at night, or in my chair at home, and read John Gillian on the screen.
Have you ever read a novel on the screen?
No.
I don't know what soul has.
I don't.
But on the other hand, when I wanted to find out last night what was going on with this business about the card catalog attempts at the public library,
I don't subscribe to the Chronicle.
It's a lot of paper.
I subscribe to the San Jose American News.
It's a fabulous paper.
They don't cover San Francisco.
I went on to the GATE, which is the San Francisco Chronicle Examiner's website, did a search.
I got four or five articles and two letters about the library.
You wouldn't just search under it.
I'd search under... Because I want to get crappy.
I'd search under library, but with a limited time frame, because I knew when the issue arose, mid-August to mid-September of this year.
And there were five or six things that I could get from the two.
They have a little search engine that works fine.
They have the Baker story in there, too?
Yeah, he was in there.
I guess we're almost done.
What I'm saying to you is this.
I think you have to help people understand that those of us who are doing interesting things with net publishing do not believe that there's not a place for print publishing.
I am printing books.
I have just printed a book on all segments.
I have printed this much stuff in the last three years here at Stanford.
I'll give you one of these things.
Okay, good.
A few things you buy.
Can I have these?
Absolutely.
Okay.
I can't give you the book report because it's very expensive, but I can show it to you.
Can we have a copy of the Stegner?
Talking about the Supreme Court thing.
This is the book we just put out.
Catching the Light, Remembering Wallace Stegner.
Right.
It's an essay that was published at the Air Review and then not read or published elsewhere by Wally, some photographs, and then I don't know how many, but a number of his students and people he influenced wrote appreciations.
Beautiful.
So I'm investing in both realms in serious ways.
It's not all one way or all another.
And Stanford is right with us.
It's a community project.
All these people staying around here.
350 other people around here all working in the same directions.
Thanks.
We'll be in touch.
Good.